---
coding: utf-8

title: The Role of the IRTF Chair
docname: draft-eggert-irtf-chair-description-latest
category: info
wg: Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)
ipr: noModificationTrust200902

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs, comments]

author:
  -
    ins: L. Eggert
    name: Lars Eggert
    org: NetApp
    street: Sonnenallee 1
    city: Kirchheim bei MÃ¼nchen
    code: 85551
    country: Germany
    phone: +49 151 120 55791
    email: lars@netapp.com


informative:
    RFC2014:
    RFC2850:
    RFC4440:
    RFC5742:
    RFC5743:
    IABEXP:
        title: "Desired Expertise: Member of the Internet Architecture Board"
        author:
            org: NomCom 2015
        date: 2015
        target: https://datatracker.ietf.org/nomcom/2015/requirements/#iab-member
    IESGEXP:
        title: Generic IESG Member Expertise
        author:
            org: NomCom 2015
        date: 2015
        target: http://trac.tools.ietf.org/group/iesg/trac/wiki/GenericExpertise
    IETFJOURNAL:
        title: The IETF Journal
        author:
            org: Internet Society
        target: http://www.internetsociety.org/publications/ietf-journal
    IRTFWIKI:
        title: IRTF Wiki
        author:
            org: Internet Research Task Force
        target: http://trac.tools.ietf.org/group/irtf/trac/wiki


--- abstract

This document briefly describes the role of the Chair of the Internet Research
Task Force (IRTF), discusses its duties and outlines the skill set a candidate
for the role should ideally have.

--- middle

# Introduction

The Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) focuses on longer term research issues
related to the Internet while the parallel organization, the Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF), focuses on the shorter term issues of engineering
and standards making.

The IRTF consists of a number of focused and long-term Research Groups (RGs).
These groups work on topics related to Internet protocols, applications,
architecture and technology. RGs have the stable long term membership needed to
promote the development of research collaboration and teamwork in exploring
research issues. Individual contributors participate in the IRTF, rather than
representatives of organizations.

{{RFC2014}} details the procedures by which RGs operate. {{RFC4440}} discusses a
view from the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) on the IRTF and its relationship
to the IETF. The RFC Editor publishes documents from the IRTF and its RGs on the
IRTF Stream {{RFC5743}}.

The IRTF Chair manages the IRTF in consultation with the Internet Research
Steering Group (IRSG). The IRSG membership includes the IRTF Chair, the chairs
of the various RGs and other individuals ("members at large") from the research
community selected by the IRTF Chair.


# Duties

This section discusses the various duties of the IRTF chair and outlines the
skill set a candidate for the role should ideally have.


## Administrative

A good fraction of the duties of the IRTF Chair are administrative. Some of them
may be permanently or temporarily delegated to other IRSG members, but they
ultimately always remain the IRTF Chair's responsibility.

Some of those related to publishing documents on the IRTF RFC Stream, such as
ensuring sufficient review, so that documents published are of good quality,
scheduling the required Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) review
{{RFC5742}}, and following up with the IESG, IANA and the RFC Editor during and
after the publication process.

Other administrative duties include reviewing and approving requests from the
RGs for time slots during IETF meetings or interim meetings elsewhere, ensuring
that meeting materials are submitted on schedule, maintaining the IRTF web site,
and -- in cooperation with the RG chairs -- ensuring that the IETF datatracker
correctly reflects the status of the various IRTF-related documents.

The IRTF Chair also needs to appoint, replace and manage the RG chairs and the
IRSG, and follow the research work of the chartered and proposed RGs to a degree
that is sufficient to let them develop an understanding on whether they are
generally operating well.

The IRTF Chair also defines the operational procedures for the IRTF (in the
boundaries defined by {{RFC2014}}) and the IRSG. At the moment, these procedures
are captures as a set of [wiki pages](#IRTFWIKI) and it is the duty of the IRTF
Chair to refine and update them.

The IRSG tries to schedule a working dinner during each IETF meeting, and the
IRTF Chair is responsible for organizing the agenda and a suitable venue.

The IRTF Chair writes a regular column for the [IETF Journal](#IETFJOURNAL) on
recent IRTF-related events.

These administrative duties are very similar to part of the duties of an Area
Director (AD) in the IETF and require the same set of organizational and
communication skills {{IESGEXP}}. They also require a regular time commitment
throughout the year, the ability to attend most of the IETF meetings in person,
as well as some other related travel.

The IRTF Chair regularly interacts with the ADs and the IESG for document
reviews, IETF meeting agenda planning, and often provides input on various IETF
efforts and topics. The IRTF Chair also regularly interacts with the IETF
Administrative Oversight Committee (IAOC) and the IETF Secretariat for meeting
planning, budgeting and other organizational purposes. In addition, the IRTF
Chair also interacts with the Tools Team to provide input on how IETF tools can
best support the operation of the IRTF. Finally, the IRTF Chair is the owner of
the IRTF RFC Stream and is hence part of the group that reviews the RFC Editor's
performance and operation; and engages with the Independent Stream Editor in
cases where submissions on that RFC Stream have relationships to the IRTF. A
good working relationship with all these individuals and bodies is important.


## Strategic

Arguably the more important part of the duties of the IRTF Chair are strategic,
and concern shaping of the purpose and scope of the IRTF, by making decisions
about which RGs to charter, which RGs to terminate, and which other activities
or efforts the IRTF should organize or affiliate itself with.

For some new RGs, the research and engineering community brings a proposal to
the IRTF Chair for discussion. However, it is common for the IRTF Chair to
identify a new area of research that is considered of importance to the
Internet, actively motivate people in the research and engineering community to
consider the formation of an RG, and help them navigate the process for doing
so.

In order to be able to fulfill this duty, it is important for the IRTF Chair to
be involved in both the academic research community as well as engineering or
operational communities. Without a demonstrated history of participation in
these often somewhat isolated communities it will be very difficult to identify
areas of academic research that are suitable for being brought into the IRTF. A
good network of contacts in these communities will be very helpful in
identifying and motivating potential RG chairs and participants.

Involvement in the academic research community can be demonstrated through a
publication record, membership in conference program and organizational
committees, participation in publicly funded collaborative research projects,
among others.

The Applied Networking Research Prize (ANRP) is a joint award of the Internet
Society (ISOC) and an example of a strategic initiative that since its inception
in 2011 now turned into more of an administrative duty. The IRTF Chair and an
ISOC representative pick and chair the ANRP selection committee, which
advertises the ANRP, encourages community nominations for the prizes, and
reviews nominations and selects prize winners. To serve in this role, the IRTF
Chair also relies on strong ties to the academic research community, to identify
suitable selection committee members and to encourage nominations for suitable
work that is published in a given year. The selection committee operates similar
to a program committee for an academic conference (more specifically, it
performs a function similar to the selection of a best paper award). It is
therefore useful if the IRTF Chair has firsthand experience serving on program
committees, and ideally, chairing them.


## IAB Membership

The IRTF Chair serves as an "ex officio" member of the IAB {{RFC2850}}, and is
expected to participate in IAB discussions and activities. This duty benefits
from expertise that is similar to those of full IAB members {{IABEXP}}, and
requires a similar time and travel commitment, for example, to attend IAB
Retreats and relevant IAB workshops.


# Security Considerations

This document raises no security considerations.


# IANA Considerations

This document has no IANA considerations.


# Acknowledgments

Robert Sparks, Brian Trammell and Stephen Farrell provided input to this
document.

Lars Eggert has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research
and innovation program 2014-2018 under grant agreement No. 644866 ("SSICLOPS").
This document reflects only the authors' views and the European Commission is
not responsible for any use that may be made of the information it contains.
